Malnutrition and lipid abnormalities in antiretroviral naïve HIV-infected adults in Addis Ababa: A cross-sectional study
  Background  Both under- and over-nutrition may occur among human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected individuals and impact on the course of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) and its management due to the close interaction between immunity and nutrition. We investigated occurrence of undernutrition, excess weight and lipid abnormalities among antiretroviral naïve HIV-infected adults in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.    Methods  A cross-sectional study on 594 antiretroviral therapy (ART) naïve HIV-infected adults was conducted in four hospitals in Addis Ababa from February to September 2013. Hematological parameters (CD4+ T cell count and hemoglobin concentration), fasting serum glucose, total cholesterol (TC) and triglycerides (TG) were determined. Information on socio-demographic, anthropometric and World Health Organization (WHO) clinical stages was collected from patient clinical records, and triangulated by structured questionnaire. Height and weight measurements were taken and body mass index (BMI), undernutrition (BMI <18.5 kg/m 2 ) and excess weight (BMI ≥25 kg/m 2 ) determined. Statistical comparisons were made to identify significant factors associated with nutritional status and lipid profiles.    Results  The prevalence of undernutrition was 15.1%, and the prevalence of excess weight was 22.1%, including 5.4% who were obese. The prevalence of hypercholesterolemia was 16.6% and it was higher in women (18.9%) than in men (11.0%) (p<0.05). However, the prevalence of hypertriglyceridemia was 29.8%. There was significant positive Spearman correlation between CD4+ T cell count and serum TC (r = 0.210, p<0.001), but no correlation was observed between CD4+ T cell count and TG (r = -0.007, p>0.05). Age categories 30–39 and 40–79, and WHO clinical stages III/IV for undernutrition; age categories 30–39 and 40–79, WHO clinical stages III/IV and TC ≥200 mg/dL for excess weight; and being female, age categories 30–39 and 40–79, and hypertriglyceridemia for hypercholesterolemia were found to be independent predictors by binomial logistic regression analysis.    Conclusion  Undernutrition, excess weight, hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia were variably prevalent in ART naïve HIV-infected populations. This emphasizes the need for targeted nutritional programs as an integral part of HIV/AIDS care. Lipid levels need to be monitored regularly in patients whether on or off ART. In addition, improvement on household income and positive change in lifestyle and/or nutritional treatment to reduce morbidity and mortality are necessary interventions in HIV/AIDs patient management.  