Latent tuberculosis infection is associated with increased unstimulated levels of interferon-gamma in Lima, Peru
  Background  We previously reported increased unstimulated blood levels of interferon-gamma in persons with latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) in the United States, suggesting enhanced immune activation in LTBI. To investigate this further in a TB-endemic setting, we assessed interferon-gamma levels in persons with and without LTBI in Peru.    Methods  We analyzed data from patients with and without a recent type 1 (spontaneous) acute myocardial infarction (AMI) who were enrolled from two public hospital networks in Lima, Peru, and underwent LTBI testing using the QuantiFERON® TB Gold In-tube (QFT) assay. Participants with a positive QFT test were defined as having LTBI, whereas participants with a negative QFT test were defined as non-LTBI. Unstimulated interferon-gamma was quantified via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in the QFT nil-tube, which does not contain antigens. We compared unstimulated interferon-gamma levels between LTBI and non-LTBI groups using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. We used proportional odds modeling for multivariable analysis.    Results  Data from 214 participants were included in this analysis. Of those, 120 (56%) had LTBI. There were no significant differences in age, sex and comorbidities between LTBI and non-LTBI participants, except for recent AMI that was more frequent in LTBI. LTBI participants had higher unstimulated interferon-gamma levels compared to non-LTBI participants (median, interquartile range; 14 pg/mL, 6.5–52.8 vs. 6.5 pg/mL, 4.5–15; P <0.01). LTBI remained associated with higher unstimulated interferon-gamma levels after controlling for age, sex, recent AMI, history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, end stage renal disease, malignancy, obesity, and tobacco use (adjusted odds ratio, 2.93; 95% confidence interval, 1.8–4.9). In a sensitivity analysis that excluded participants with AMI, the association between unstimulated interferon-gamma and LTBI remained present (adjusted odds ratio; 3.93; 95% confidence interval, 1.9–8.2).    Conclusions  LTBI was associated with higher unstimulated interferon-gamma levels. These data suggest ongoing immune activation in LTBI.  