The impact of team based interprofessional comprehensive assessments on the diagnosis and management of diabetic foot ulcers: A retrospective cohort study
  Background  Diabetic foot ulcers (DFU) are increasingly prevalent, and associated with significant morbidity, mortality, and cost. An interprofessional approach to DFU management is critical given the etiological complexity involved. This study aimed to assess the impact of an interprofessional team approach on DFU diagnosis and management for a cohort of patients receiving treatment in an Ontario Canada home care setting.    Methods  A retrospective cohort study of patients attending a large regional Community Care Access Centre (CCAC) between February 11, 2013-September 30, 2014 was conducted. Following CCAC referral, patients were assessed by an interprofessional team at the Toronto Regional Wound Healing Centre (TRWHC). Those aged > 18 years with a DFU of > 6 weeks duration were included. The primary outcome was the precision of the initial diagnosis relating to DFU etiology (i.e. neuropathic, ischemic or mixed etiology). Secondary outcomes included wound healing, and infection parameters. Analysis was completed with STATA 13.1 (College Stn., TX) of pre-determined outcomes with 2 sided α of 0.05.    Results  A total of 308 patients were screened, and 49 patients (67.3% male) of mean age 64.2 years (SD 13.7) with a diagnosis of DFU > 6 weeks duration were included for analysis. Of these, 95% were referred with unspecified DFU, and were reclassified to a precise diagnosis relating to etiology, including neuropathy, ischemia or neuroischemic etiology following TRWHC assessment (p < 0.001). For secondary outcomes post-assessment, healability assessment was conducted for a greater proportion of patients (100% versus 44%, p < 0.001). Infection was identified in a greater number of patients (p = 0.04), and of the 35 patients, 94.5% had deep and surrounding infection, and 88.0% were initiated on systemic antibiotics. Vascular insufficiency was diagnosed in an additional 14.3% of the cohort (p = 0.03). Offloading/footwear assessment was conducted in all patients compared with 30.6% prior to referral (p < 0.001) Dressing change frequency decreased significantly following TRWHC assessment (pre: 4.31/week; post: 3.54/week; p = 0.03). Pain scores decreased (2.18 to 1.67) on the numerical rating scale but this was not statistically significant at the final TRWHC assessment. Notably, 36.7% (18/49) reported improved quality of life by the second TRWHC encounter.    Conclusions  Interprofessional care teams are associated with improved diagnostic acumen and wound healing outcomes over conventional community care services. Initiatives including best practice interprofessional diabetic foot care pathways are recommended with timely vascular management of ischemia, treatment of deep and surrounding infection as well as the availability of foot care and footwear.  