Factors associated with death and loss to follow-up in children on antiretroviral care in Mingalardon Specialist Hospital, Myanmar, 2006–2016
  Background  Myanmar National AIDS programme’s priority is to improve the survival of all people living with HIV by providing anti-retroviral therapy (ART) care. More than 7200 children (aged <15 years) have been enrolled into ART care from 2005 to 2016. A previous study showed that ~11% children on ART care had either died or were lost to follow-up by 60 months. Factors associated with death and lost-to follow-up (adverse outcomes) have not been previously studied.    Objectives  To describe the association between demographic and clinical characteristics at enrollment into ART care with adverse outcomes.    Methods  Cohort study using records of children enrolled for ART care at Mingalardon Specialist Hospital (main Paediatric ART center in Myanmar) from 2006–2016. We used multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression models for analysis.    Results  1,159 children were enrolled for ART care and they contributed a total of 1.45 million person-days of follow-up period. 112 (10%) had an adverse outcome during the follow-up time period (55 deaths, 57 lost to follow-up). Enrollment into the ART care through in-patient care department of the hospital, CD4 Cell count <50/mm 3 , enrollment during changing ART guidelines (different ART eligibility criteria and preferred ART regimen) were independently associated with higher hazards of adverse outcome. Receiving protease inhibitor-based ART regimen at enrollment was independently associated with lower hazards of adverse outcome. Age, sex, residing in urban or rural areas, WHO clinical stage, having TB at the time of enrollment, receiving cotrimoxazole prophylaxis were not statistically associated with adverse outcomes.    Conclusion  Our analysis reconfirms good survival of children on ART care (including those with TB). The characteristics associated with adverse outcomes (other than CD4 cell count<50) are surrogates of some unmeasured underlying health system/ patient related factors that needs further exploration to improve the survival of children on ART care.  