Spinal cord hypometabolism associated with infection by human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1(HTLV-1)
  Background  HTLV-1 infection is endemic in Brazil. About 1 to 2% of the Brazilian population is estimated to be infected, but most infected HTLV-1 individuals do not know about their own infection, which favors the continuity of sexual and vertical virus transmission. In addition, HTLV-1 associated central nervous system diseases and their pathophysiologic mechanisms are not fully understood. This study aimed to evaluate the correlation of spinal cord metabolism, viral and inflammatory profiles with features of neurological presentation in HTLV-1 infected individuals.    Methodology  This is a cross-sectional study of a cohort including 48 HTLV-1 infected individuals clinically classified as asymptomatic- AG (N = 21), symptomatic- SG (N = 11) and HAM/TSP- HG (N = 16) and a nested case-control study with HTLV-1 infected individuals- HIG (N = 48) and HTLV-1 non infected controls- CG (N = 30) that had their spinal cord analysed by Positron Emission Tomography with 18F-Fluordeoxyglucose (18F-FDG PET/CT). HTLV-1 infected individuals had 18F-FDG PET/CT results analyzed with clinical and demographic data, proviral load, cytokines and chemokines in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).    Principal Findings  18F-FDG PET/CT showed hypometabolism in the thoracic spinal cord in HTLV-1 infected individuals. The method had an accuracy of 94.4% to identify HAM/TSP. A greater involvement of the thoracic spinal cord was observed, although hypometabolism was also observed in the cervical spinal cord segment in HTLV-1 infected individuals. Individuals with HAM/TSP showed a pro-inflammatory profile in comparison to asymptomatic and symptomatic groups, with a higher level of Interferon-inducible T-cell alpha chemoattractant (ITAC/CXCL 11 ), IL-6, IL-12p70 in the plasma; and ITAC, IL-4, IL-5, IL-8 (CXCL 8 ) and TNF-alpha in the CSF. Using regression, thoracic spinal cord SUV (standardized uptake value) and CSF ITAC level were identified as the HAM/TSP predictors in the multivariate model.    Conclusions  18F-FDG PET/CT imaging showed spinal cord hypometabolism in most HTLV-1 infected individuals, even in the asymptomatic HTLV-1 group. Thoracic spinal cord hypometabolism and CSF-ITAC levels were identified predictors of HAM/TSP.    Significance  Our findings suggested that in most HTLV-1 infected individuals there was compromise of central nervous system (CNS) structures despite of the lack of clinical symptoms. To explain the found hypometabolism, the role of microcirculatory and metabolic factors in the pathogenesis of neurological diseases associated with HTLV-1 infection must be further investigated. It is paramount to evaluate the central nervous function and to compare the performance among HTLV-1 infected individuals considered asymptomatic to the uninfected controls.  