Comparison of FDA accelerated vs regular pathway approvals for lung cancer treatments between 2006 and 2018
 Regulatory agencies around the world have been using flexible requirements for approval of new drugs, especially for cancer drugs. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is mostly the first agency to approve new drugs worldwide, mainly due to the faster terms of the accelerated pathway and breakthrough therapy designation. Surrogate endpoints and preliminary data (e.g. single-arm and phase 2 studies) are used for these new approvals, however larger effect sizes are expected. We aim to compare FDA Accelerated vs Regular Pathway approvals and Breakthrough therapy designations (BTD) for lung cancer treatments between 2006 and 2018 regarding study design, sample size, outcome measures and effect size. We assessed the FDA database to collect data from studies that formed the basis of approvals of new drugs or indications for lung cancer spanning from 2006 to 2018. We found that accelerated pathway approvals are based on significantly more single-arm studies with small sample sizes and surrogate primary endpoints. However, effect size was not different between the pathways. A large proportion of studies used to support regular pathway approvals also showed these characteristics that are related to low quality and uncertain evidence. Compared to other approvals, BTD were more frequently based on single-arm studies. There was no significant difference in use of surrogate endpoints or sample size. 44% of BTD were based on studies demonstrating large effect sizes, proportionally more than approvals not receiving this designation. In conclusion, based on the indicators of evidence quality we extracted, criteria’s for granting accelerated approval and breakthrough therapy designation seen not clear. Faster approvals are in the majority full of uncertainties which should be viewed with caution and the patient have to be communicated to allow shared decision making. Post-marketing validation is essential. 