Acceptable medication non-adherence: A crowdsourcing study among French physicians for commonly prescribed medications
  Background  Achieving good medication adherence is a major challenge for patients with chronic conditions. Our study aimed to assess the Threshold for Unacceptable Risk of Non-adherence (TURN), defined as the threshold at which physicians consider the health risks incurred by patients due to medication non-adherence unacceptable, for the most commonly prescribed drugs in France.    Methods  We conducted an online study using a crowdsourcing approach among French general practitioners and specialists from September 2016 to August 2017. Physicians assessed the TURN for various levels of missed doses by evaluating a series of randomly presented clinical vignettes, each presenting a given medication with a given therapeutic indication. For each “drug-indication group” (i.e., all drugs from the same pharmacological class with a similar therapeutic indication): 1) we described the distribution of physicians’ assessments, 2) we provided a summary estimate of the TURN, defined as the frequency of missed doses above which 75% of the physicians’ assessments were located; 3) we computed the number of pill boxes reimbursed in France in 2016 to put our results into context.    Results  We collected a total of 5365 assessments from 544 physicians, each of whom evaluated a random sample among 528 distinct clinical vignettes. Estimates of the TURN varied widely across drug-indication groups, ranging from risk considered unacceptable with 1 daily dose missed per month (e.g., insulin for diabetes) to risk always considered acceptable (e.g., anti-dementia drugs). Drugs with an estimated TURN of over one missing daily dose per week represented 44.9% of the prescription volume of the medications assessed in our study.    Conclusions  According to physicians, the impact of non-adherence may vary greatly. Patient-physician discussions on the variable consequences of non-adherence could lead to a paradigm shift by seeking to reach “optimal adherence” depending on drugs rather than unrealistic “perfect adherence” to all drugs.  