A yield and cost comparison of tuberculosis contact investigation and intensified case finding in Uganda
  Introduction  Resource constraints in Low and Middle-Income Countries (LMICs) limit tuberculosis (TB) contact investigation despite evidence its benefits could outweigh costs, with increased efficiency when compared with intensified case finding (ICF). However, there is limited data on yield and cost per TB case identified. We compared yield and cost per TB case identified for ICF and Tuberculosis-Contact Investigation (TB-CI) in Uganda.    Methods  A retrospective cohort study based on data from 12 Ugandan hospitals was done between April and September 2017. Two methods of TB case finding (i.e. ICF and TB-CI) were compared. Regarding ICF, patients either self-reported their signs and symptoms or were prompted by health care workers, while TB-CI was done by home-visiting and screening contacts of TB patients. Patients who were presumed to have tuberculosis were requested to produce a sample for examination. TB yield was defined as a ratio of diagnoses to tests, and this was computed per method of diagnosis. The cost per TB case identified (medical, personnel, transportation and training) for each diagnosis method were computed using the activity-based approach, from the health care perspective. Cost data were analyzed using Windows Excel.    Results  454 index TB cases and 2,707 of their household contacts were investigated. Thirty-one per cent of contacts (840/2707) were found to be presumptive TB cases. A total of 7,685 tests were done, 6,967 for ICF and 718 for TB-CI. The yields were 18.62% (1297/6967) and 5.29% (38/718) for ICF and TB-CI, respectively. It cost US$ 120.60 to diagnose a case of TB using ICF compared to US$ 877.57 for TB-CI.    Conclusion  The yield of TB-CI was found to be four-times lower and seven-times costlier compared to ICF. These findings suggest that ICF can improve TB case detection at a low cost, particularly in high TB prevalent settings.  