Risk factors for surgical site infection after lumbar laminectomy and/or discectomy for degenerative diseases in adults: A prospective multicenter surveillance study with registry of 4027 cases
 Surgical site infection (SSI) is a significant complication after spinal surgery and is associated with increased hospital length of stay, high healthcare costs, and poor patient outcomes. Accurate identification of risk factors is essential to develop strategies to prevent wound infections. The aim of this prospective multicenter study was to determine the independent factors associated with SSI in posterior lumbar surgeries without fusion (laminectomy and/or herniotomy) for degenerative diseases in adult patients. From July 2010 to June 2014, we conducted a prospective multicenter surveillance study in adult patients who developed SSI after undergoing lumbar laminectomy and/or discectomy in ten participating hospitals. Detailed patient and operative characteristics were prospectively recorded using a standardized data collection format. SSI was based on the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention definition. A total of 4027 consecutive adult patients were enrolled, of which 26 (0.65%) developed postoperative SSI. Multivariate regression analysis indicated two independent factors. An operating time >2 h (P = 0.0095) was a statistically significant independent risk factor, whereas endoscopic tubular surgery (P = 0.040) was a significant independent protective factor. Identification of these associated factors may contribute to surgeons’ awareness of the risk factors for SSI and could help counsel the patients on the risks associated with lumbar laminectomy and/or discectomy. Furthermore, this study’s findings could be used to develop protocols to decrease SSI risk. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first prospective multicenter study that identified endoscopic tubular surgery as an independent protective factor against SSI after lumbar posterior surgery without fusion. 