Utilization of diabetes management health care services and its association with glycemic control among patients participating in a peer educator-based program in Cambodia
  Background  Substantial evidence supports the effectiveness of peer educator programs for diabetes management in low- and middle-income countries. However, little is known about peer educators’ impact relative to other treatment components such as medication and physician consultation. In Cambodia, the non-governmental organization MoPoTsyo organizes four services for people with diabetes: self-management training through peer educator visits, lab tests, physician consultations, and low-cost medicines. Our aims were to 1) quantify MoPoTsyo participant utilization of each program service and 2) define the relationship between each program service and glycemic control.    Methods  We conducted a retrospective cohort study among 4,210 MoPoTsyo participants, using data collected by MoPoTsyo from 2006–2016. Independent variables assessed were medication adherence, number of peer educator visits, number of physician consultations, and number of lab tests. A multiple logistic regression model was used to evaluate the association between these disease management services and glycemic control—fasting plasma glucose ≤130 mg/dl or post-prandial glucose ≤180 mg/dl—based on most recent glucose level. The model was adjusted for baseline demographic and disease characteristics.    Findings  Participants with 12 or more peer educator visits per year had a 35% higher odds of glycemic control relative to participants with 4 or fewer visits (odds ratio 1.35, 95% CI: 1.08–1.69; p = 0.009), after adjustment for utilization of other treatment components (medication adherence, number of physician visits, number of lab tests), follow-up time, and demographic and disease characteristics. Better adherence to medications and a greater number of lab tests per year were also associated with a higher odds of glycemic control after adjustment. Number of physician consultations was not associated with glycemic control after adjustment.    Conclusions  This study demonstrates a positive association between peer educator utilization and glycemic control incremental to other elements of diabetes management. These results suggest that peer educators may be a valuable addition to comprehensive diabetes management programs in low- and middle-income countries even when other health care services are accessible. The associations identified in this research warrant further prospective studies to explore the causal impact of peer educators on glycemic control relative to other disease management components.  