Associations between CT-determined visceral fat burden, hepatic steatosis, circulating white blood cell counts and neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio
 Visceral adiposity is associated with cardiovascular disease, an association that may be mediated in part by inflammation. We hypothesized that regional measures of visceral adiposity would associate with commonly obtained clinical measures of immune status. We consecutively studied 3,291 subjects (mean age, 49.8±9.8 years) who underwent an annual cardiovascular risk survey. Peri-cardial (PCF) and thoracic peri-aortic adipose tissue (TAT) volumes were determined by dedicated computed tomography (CT) software (Aquarius 3D Workstation, TeraRecon, San Mateo, CA, USA). Hepatic steatosis was assessed by abdominal ultrasonography. We explored cross-sectional associations between visceral fat measures and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), leukocyte counts, and the neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ration (NLR). Among 3,291 study participants, we observed positive linear associations between PCF and TAT, higher degree of hepatic steatosis and hs-CRP, various leukocyte counts, either total and its differential counts, and NLR (all trend p<0.001). Multi-variate linear and logistic regression models showed independent associations between PCF/TAT (ß-Coef: 0.14/0.16, both p<0.05) and total WBC counts, with only TAT further demonstrated significant relations with neutrophil counts and NLR (both p<0.05) and independently identified abnormally high WBC and NLR (Odds ratio: 1.18 & 1.21, both p<0.05). C-statistics showed significant incremental model prediction for abnormally high WBC and NLR (both ΔAUROC<0.05) when TAT was superimposed on traditional cardiovascular risks and biochemical information. Greater visceral adiposity burden and hepatic steatosis may be associated with higher circulating leukocyte counts and markers for atherosclerosis, with more pronounced influences for peri-aortic adiposity. Our data suggested the differential biological impacts for region-specific visceral adiposity. 