Antibiotic prescription practices among prescribers for children under five at public health centers III and IV in Mbarara district
  Introduction  Rational use of medicines requires that patients receive medications appropriate to their clinical needs. Irrational prescription of antibiotics has been reported in many health systems across the world. In Uganda, mainly nurses and assistant medical officers (Clinical officers) prescribe for children at level III and IV primary care facilities (health center II and IV). Nurses are not primarily trained prescribers; their antibiotic prescription maybe associated with errors. There is a need to understand the practices of antibiotic prescription among prescribers in the public primary care facilities. We therefore determined antibiotic prescription practices of prescribers for children under five years at health center III and IV in Mbarara district, South Western Uganda.    Methods  This was a retrospective descriptive cross-sectional study. We reviewed outpatient records of children <5 years of age retrospectively. Information obtained from the outpatient registers were captured in predesigned data abstraction form. Health care providers working at health centers III and IV were interviewed using a structured questionnaire. They provided information on socio-demographic, health facility, antibiotic prescription practices and availability of reference tools. Data was analyzed using STATA software version 13∙0.    Results  There were 1218 outpatients records of children under five years reviewed and 35 health care providers interviewed. The most common childhood illness diagnosed was upper respiratory tract infection. It received the most antibiotic prescription (53%). The most commonly prescribed oral antibiotics were cotrimoxazole and amoxicillin, and ceftriaxone and benzyl penicillin were the commonest prescribed injectable antibiotics. Up to 68.4% of the antibiotic prescription was irrational. No prescriber or facility factors were associated with irrational antibiotic prescription practices.    Conclusion  Upper respiratory tract infection is the most diagnosed condition in children under five years with Cotrimoxazole and Amoxicillin being the most commonly prescribed antibiotics. Antibiotics are being prescribed irrationally at health centers III and IV in Mbarara District. Training and support supervision of prescribers at health centers III and IV in Mbarara district need to be prioritized by the district health team.  