Effects of the antidepressant medication duloxetine on brain metabolites in persistent depressive disorder: A randomized, controlled trial
  Background  To assess whether patients with Persistent Depressive Disorder ( PDD ) have abnormal levels of N -acetyl-aspartate ( NAA ) and whether those levels normalize following treatment with the antidepressant medication duloxetine. Furthermore, we conducted post hoc analyses of other important brain metabolites to understand better the cellular and physiological determinants for changes in NAA levels.    Methods  We acquired proton (1H) magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging ( MRSI ) data on a 3 Tesla (3T), GE Magnetic Resonance Imaging ( MRI ) scanner in 41 patients (39.9±10.4 years, 22 males) with PDD at two time points: before the start and at the end of a 10-week, placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized controlled trial ( RCT ) of the antidepressant medication duloxetine. Patients were randomized such that 21 patients received the active medication and 20 patients received placebo during the 10 week period of the trial. In addition, we acquire 1H MRSI data once in 29 healthy controls (37.7±11.2 years, 17 males).    Findings  Patients had significantly higher baseline concentrations of NAA across white matter ( WM ) pathways and subcortical gray matter, and in direct proportion to the severity of depressive symptoms. NAA concentrations declined in duloxetine-treated patients over the duration of the trial in the direction toward healthy values, whereas concentrations increased in placebo-treated patients, deviating even further away from healthy values. Changes in NAA concentration did not mediate medication effects on reducing symptom severity, however; instead, changes in symptom severity partially mediated the effects of medication on NAA concentration, especially in the caudate and putamen.    Interpretation  These findings, taken together, suggest that PDD is not a direct consequence of elevated NAA concentrations, but that a more fundamental pathophysiological process likely causes PDD and determines the severity of its symptoms. The findings also suggest that although duloxetine normalized NAA concentrations in patients, it did so by modulating the severity of depressive symptoms. Medication presumably reduced depressive symptoms through other, as yet unidentified, brain processes.    Trial registration  ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00360724 .  