Intestinal parasitic infection alters bone marrow derived dendritic cell inflammatory cytokine production in response to bacterial endotoxin in a diet-dependent manner
 Giardia lamblia is a common intestinal parasitic infection that although often acutely asymptomatic, is associated with debilitating chronic intestinal and extra-intestinal sequelae. In previously healthy adults, a primary sporadic Giardia infection can lead to gut dysfunction and fatigue. These symptoms correlate with markers of inflammation that persist well after the infection is cleared. In contrast, in endemic settings, first exposure occurs in children who are frequently malnourished and also co-infected with other enteropathogens. In these children, Giardia rarely causes symptoms and associates with several decreased markers of inflammation. Mechanisms underlying these disparate and potentially enduring outcomes following Giardia infection are not presently well understood. A body of work suggests that the outcome of experimental Giardia infection is influenced by the nutritional status of the host. Here, we explore the consequences of experimental Giardia infection under conditions of protein sufficiency or deficiency on cytokine responses of ex vivo bone marrow derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) to endotoxin stimulation. We show that BMDCs from Giardia- challenged mice on a protein sufficient diet produce more IL-23 when compared to uninfected controls whereas BMDCs from Giardia challenged mice fed a protein deficient diet do not. Further, in vivo co-infection with Giardia attenuates robust IL-23 responses in endotoxin-stimulated BMDCs from protein deficient mice harboring enteroaggregative Escherichia coli . These results suggest that intestinal Giardia infection may have extra-intestinal effects on BMDC inflammatory cytokine production in a diet dependent manner, and that Giardia may influence the severity of the innate immune response to other enteropathogens. This work supports recent findings that intestinal microbial exposure may have lasting influences on systemic inflammatory responses, and may provide better understanding of potential mechanisms of post-infectious sequelae and clinical variation during Giardia and enteropathogen co-infection. 