Factors associated with uncontrolled blood pressure among Ghanaians: Evidence from a multicenter hospital-based study
  Background  The burden of uncontrolled hypertension in Low-and-Middle Income Countries (LMICs) is high, with an increased risk of cardiovascular diseases and chronic renal failure in these settings.    Objective  To assess the factors associated with uncontrolled blood pressure control in a cross-section of Ghanaian hypertensive subjects involved in an on-going multicenter epidemiological study aimed at improving access to hypertension treatment.    Methods  A cross-sectional study involving 2,870 participants with hypertension with or without diabetes who were enrolled at 5 hospitals in Ghana (2 tertiary, 2 district and 1 rural hospital). Data on demographics, medical history, lifestyle factors, anti-hypertensive medications and treatment adherence were collected. The 14-item version of the Hill-Bone compliance to high blood pressure therapy scale was used to assess adherence to treatment in 3 domains namely adherence to medications, salt intake and clinic appointments. Questionnaires on knowledge, attitudes and practices on hypertension, sources of antihypertensive medications and challenges with accessing these medications were also administered. Blood pressure, weight and height were measured for each subject at enrollment. Factors associated with uncontrolled blood pressure (>140/90mmHg) were assessed using a multivariate logistic regression model.    Results  The mean ± SD age of study participants was 58.9 ± 16.6 years, with a female preponderance (76.8%). Among study participants, 1,213 (42.3%) study participants had blood pressure measurements under control. Factors that remained significantly associated with uncontrolled blood pressure with adjusted OR (95% CI) included receiving therapy at a tertiary level of care: 2.47 (1.57–3.87), longer duration of hypertension diagnosis: 1.01 (1.00–1.03), poor adherence to therapy: 1.21 (1.09–1.35) for each 5 points higher score on the Hill-Bone scale, reported difficulties in obtaining antihypertensive medications: 1.24 (1.02–1.49) and number of antihypertensive medications prescribed: 1.32 (1.21–1.44).    Conclusion  We have found high rates of uncontrolled blood pressure among Ghanaian patients with hypertension accessing healthcare in public institutions. The system-level and individual-level factors associated with poor blood pressure control should be addressed to improve hypertension management among Ghanaians.  