Gut carriage of antimicrobial resistance genes among young children in urban Maputo, Mozambique: Associations with enteric pathogen carriage and environmental risk factors
 Because poor sanitation is hypothesized as a major direct and indirect pathway of exposure to antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs), we sought to determine a) the prevalence of and b) environmental risk factors for gut carriage of key ARGs in a pediatric cohort at high risk of enteric infections due to poor water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) conditions. We investigated ARGs in stool from young children in crowded, low-income settlements of Maputo, Mozambique, and explored potential associations with concurrent enteric pathogen carriage, diarrhea, and environmental risk factors, including WASH. We collected stool from 120 children <14 months old and tested specimens via quantal, multiplex molecular assays for common bacterial, viral, and protozoan enteric pathogens and 84 ARGs encoding potential resistance to 7 antibiotic classes. We estimated associations between ARG detection (number and diversity detected) and concurrently-measured enteric pathogen carriage, recently-reported diarrhea, and risk factors in the child’s living environment. The most commonly-detected ARGs encoded resistance to macrolides, lincosamides, and streptogramins (100% of children); tetracyclines (98%); β-lactams (94%), aminoglycosides (84%); fluoroquinolones (48%); and vancomycin (38%). Neither concurrent diarrhea nor measured environmental (including WASH) conditions were associated with ARG detection in adjusted models. Enteric pathogen carriage and ARG detection were associated: on average, 18% more ARGs were detected in stool from children carrying bacterial pathogens than those without (adjusted risk ratio (RR): 1.18, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.02, 1.37), with 16% fewer ARGs detected in children carrying parasitic pathogens (protozoans, adjusted RR: 0.84, 95% CI: 0.71, 0.99). We observed gut ARGs conferring potential resistance to a range of antibiotics in this at-risk cohort that had high rates of enteric infection, even among children <14 months-old. Gut ARGs did not appear closely correlated with WASH, though environmental conditions were generally poor. ARG carriage may be associated with concurrent carriage of bacterial enteric pathogens, suggesting indirect linkages to WASH that merit further investigation. 