Progress in Mozambique: Changes in the availability, use, and quality of emergency obstetric and newborn care between 2007 and 2012
  Introduction  Maternal mortality in Mozambique has not declined significantly in the last 10–15 years, plateauing around 480 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births. Good quality antenatal care and routine and emergency intrapartum care are critical to reducing preventable maternal and newborn deaths.    Materials and methods  We compare the findings from two national cross-sectional facility-based assessments conducted in 2007 and 2012. Both were designed to measure the availability, use and quality of emergency obstetric and neonatal care. Indicators for monitoring emergency obstetric care were used as were descriptive statistics.    Results  The availability of facilities providing the full range of obstetric life-saving procedures (signal functions) decreased. However, an expansion in the provision of individual signal functions was highly visible in health centers and health posts, but in hospitals, performance was less satisfactory, with proportionally fewer hospitals providing assisted vaginal delivery, obstetric surgery and blood transfusions. All other key indicators showed signs of improvements: the institutional delivery rate, the cesarean delivery rate, met need for emergency obstetric care (EmOC), institutional stillbirth and early neonatal death rates, and cause-specific case fatality rates (CFRs). CFRs for most major obstetric complications declined between 17% and 69%. The contribution of direct causes to maternal deaths decreased while the proportion of indirect causes doubled during the five-year interval.    Conclusions  The indicator of EmOC service availability, often used for planning and developing EmONC networks, requires close examination. The standard definition can mask programmatic weaknesses and thus, fails to inform decision makers of what to target. In this case, the decline in the use of assisted vaginal delivery explained much of the difference in this indicator between the two surveys, as did faltering hospital performance.  Despite this backsliding, many signs of improvement were also observed in this 5-year period, but indicator levels continue below recommended thresholds. The quality of intrapartum care and the adverse consequences from infectious diseases during pregnancy point to priority areas for programmatic improvement.  