Effect of nocturnal hemodialysis on sleep parameters in patients with end-stage renal disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
  Introduction  Recently, a small but growing literature has depicted the beneficial effects of nocturnal hemodialysis (NHD) over conventional hemodialysis (CHD) in the fields of sleep disorders such as sleep apnea. The impact of various dialysis models on sleep disorders, however, has not been determined. The objective of our meta-analysis is to examine the potential effects of NHD, compared with CHD, on sleep disorders in HD patients.    Methods  Several electronic databases including PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, ClinicalTrials.gov and CNKI were searched, using the search terms “nocturnal” (or “nightly”) and “dialysis” (or “hemodialysis” or “renal dialysis”) from the earliest available date of indexing to March 2018. Two authors independently extracted data, evaluated the study quality, and conducted random-effects meta-analyses using STATA 12.0.    Results  Of 1789 potentially relevant citations, 9 fulfilled eligibility criteria, consisting of 6 single-arm studies (comparing pre- and post-intervention outcomes), 1 observational study, and 2 randomized controlled trials (a total of 286 participants). Regarding objective sleep assessments, conversion from CHD to NHD resulted in a significant reduction in the AHI (Mean difference was -14.90; 95% CI, -20.12 to -9.68), a significant increase of SaO2 (Mean difference was 1.38%; 95% CI, 0.35% to 2.42%), and a significant decrease of TST (Mean difference was -0.31; 95% CI, -0.47 to -0.15). The trends were even stronger in the HD patients with sleep disorders. However, regarding subjective sleep assessments, improved sleep quality was found in the prospective pre-post intervention studies and cohort studies, while no significant improvements were found in the randomized controlled trials.    Conclusion  Although a significant improvement of sleep apnea was observed by switching from CHD to NHD, it may not yield a net benefit in overall subjective sleep quality.  