Roles of Insulin Receptor Substrates (IRS) in renal function and renal hemodynamics
 We have reported previously that renal hemodynamic abnormalities exist in the prediabetic stage of type II diabetic rats. At this prediabetic stage these rats have hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome. It is well known that insulin resistance is frequently associated with renal abnormalities, but the mechanism underlying this association has remained speculative. Although insulin is known to modify renal hemodynamics, little is known about the roles of insulin receptor substrates (IRS1, IRS2) in the renal actions of insulin. To address this issue, the effects of insulin on renal function and renal hemodynamics were investigated in C57BL/6 (WT: wild type), insulin receptor substrate 1- knockout ( IRS1–/– ), and IRS2-knockout ( IRS2–/– ) mice. IRS2–/–mice had elevated glucose level as expected. 24-h urine collections and serum creatinine revealed that creatinine clearance did not significantly differ between these groups. Albuminuria was found in IRS1–/– and IRS2–/– groups. We examined the effects on the IRS during the administration of Losartan, which is widely used for diabetic nephropathy. After the administration of Losartan the IRS displayed improved renal hemodynamics. Moreover, the subjects were also given Pioglitazone, which improves insulin resistance. Losartan significantly reduced albuminuria in both groups. Pioglitazone also showed similar results. We assessed the autoregulatory responses of the total renal blood flow (RBF), the superficial (SBF) and the deep renal cortical blood flow (DBF) with stepwise reductions of renal perfusion pressure (RPP), which was induced by a manual clamp on the abdominal aorta. During the clamp induced reductions of the RPP by 10 to 20mm HG, RBF, SBF and the DBF fell significantly more in the IRS1 and IRS2 than in the WT mice. Furthermore micropuncture studies showded that compared to the WT tubuloglomerular feedback (TGF) responses of the stop flow pressure (P sf ) were reduced in both the IRS1 -/- and IRS2 -/- . The results of the IRS1 and IRS2 mice displayed the pressence of hemodynamic abnormalities. Losartan and Pioglitazone have shown the potential to improve these abnormalities. In conclusion the results indicate that IRS plays a major role in the stimulation of renal functions and renal hemodynamics in type type II diabetes. 