Follow-up between 6 and 24 months after discharge from treatment for severe acute malnutrition in children aged 6-59 months: A systematic review
  Background  Severe acute malnutrition (SAM) is a major global health problem affecting some 16.9 million children under five. Little is known about what happens to children 6–24 months post-discharge as this window often falls through the gap between studies on SFPs and those focusing on longer-term effects.    Methods  A protocol was registered on PROSPERO (PROSPERO 2017:CRD42017065650). Embase, Global Health and MEDLINE In-Process and Non-Indexed Citations were systematically searched with terms related to SAM, nutritional intervention and follow-up between June and August 2017. Studies were selected if they included children who experienced an episode of SAM, received a therapeutic feeding intervention, were discharged as cured and presented any outcome from follow-up between 6–24 months later.    Results  3,691 articles were retrieved from the search, 55 full-texts were screened and seven met the inclusion criteria. Loss-to-follow-up, mortality, relapse, morbidity and anthropometry were outcomes reported. Between 0.0% and 45.1% of cohorts were lost-to-follow-up. Of those discharged as nutritionally cured, mortality ranged from 0.06% to 10.4% at an average of 12 months post-discharge. Relapse was inconsistently defined, measured, and reported, ranging from 0% to 6.3%. Two studies reported improved weight-for-height z-scores, whilst three studies that reported height-for-age z-scores found either limited or no improvement.    Conclusions  Overall, there is a scarcity of studies that follow-up children 6–24 months post-discharge from SAM treatment. Limited data that exists suggest that children may exhibit sustained vulnerability even after achieving nutritional cure, including heightened mortality and morbidity risk and persistent stunting. Prospective cohort studies assessing a wider range of outcomes in children post-SAM treatment are a priority, as are intervention studies exploring how to improve post-SAM outcomes and identify high-risk children.  