Predicting cognitive resilience from midlife lifestyle and multi-modal MRI: A 30-year prospective cohort study
  Background  There is significant heterogeneity in the clinical expression of structural brain abnormalities, including Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers. Some individuals preserve their memory despite the presence of risk factors or pathological brain changes, indicating resilience. We aimed to test whether resilient individuals could be distinguished from those who develop cognitive impairment, using sociodemographic variables and neuroimaging.    Methods  We included 550 older adults participating in the Whitehall II study with longitudinal data, cognitive test results, and multi-modal MRI. Hippocampal atrophy was defined as Scheltens Scores >0. Resilient individuals (n = 184) were defined by high cognitive performance despite hippocampal atrophy (HA). Non-resilient participants (n = 133) were defined by low cognitive performance (≥1.5 standard deviations (S.D.) below the group mean) in the presence of HA. Dynamic and static exposures were evaluated for their ability to predict later resilience status using multivariable logistic regression. In a brain-wide analysis we tested for group differences in the integrity of white matter (structural connectivity) and resting-state networks (functional connectivity).    Findings  Younger age (OR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.83 to 0.92, p<0.001), higher premorbid FSIQ (OR: 1.06, 95% CI: 1.03 to 1.10, p<0.0001) and social class (OR 1 vs. 3: 4.99, 95% CI: 1.30 to 19.16, p = 0.02, OR 2 vs. 3: 8.43, 95% CI: 1.80 to 39.45, p = 0.007) were independently associated with resilience. Resilient individuals could be differentiated from non-resilient participants by higher fractional anisotropy (FA), and less association between anterior and posterior resting state networks. Higher FA had a significantly more positive effect on cognitive performance in participants with HA, compared to those without.    Conclusions  Resilient individuals could be distinguished from those who developed impairments on the basis of sociodemographic characteristics, brain structural and functional connectivity, but not midlife lifestyles. There was a synergistic deleterious effect of hippocampal atrophy and poor white matter integrity on cognitive performance. Exploiting and supporting neural correlates of resilience could offer a fresh approach to postpone or avoid the appearance of clinical symptoms.  