Lessons learned from using respondent-driven sampling (RDS) to assess sexual risk behaviors among Kenyan young adults living in urban slum settlements: A process evaluation
  Background  Respondent-driven sampling (RDS) is a peer-referral sampling methodology used to estimate characteristics of underserved groups that cannot be randomly sampled. RDS has been implemented in several settings to identify hidden populations at risk for HIV, but few studies have reported the methodological lessons learned on RDS design and implementation for assessing sexual risk behaviors in marginalized youth.    Methods  We used RDS to recruit N = 350 young adults, aged 18 to 22, who were living in urban slum settlements in Nairobi, Kenya. A structured survey was used to assess sexual risk behaviors. Twenty seeds were selected and asked to recruit up to three eligible peers. We used small monetary incentives and a three-day recruitment coupon with sequential numbers linking recruiters to their recruits.    Results  Data collection was completed in 8 days with a maximum chain length of 6 waves. Each seed yielded 16 to 21 eligible recruits. Three (15%) seeds were unproductive and were replaced. RDS benefits were high identification rates (90% coupons returned per coupons given), high eligibility rates (100% eligible recruits per coupons returned), and high efficiency (~39 eligible recruits per day). 44% of the sample was female. Most recruits (74%) reported being “friends” for 7+ years with their recruiter. RDS overcame feasibility concerns of household-, clinic-, and school-based sampling methodologies in that underserved youth who were unemployed (68%), out of school (48%), ethnic minorities (26%), and having prior residential instability (≥2 moves in the past year) (20%) were successfully recruited, based on weighted analyses. Youth reporting HIV risk behaviors, including unprotected sex (38%), sex while high/drunk (35%), and sex exchange for pay (14%), were also enrolled. However, 28% were not sexually active within the last 6 months. Challenges included managing wait times during peaks and participant referral expectations. Community engagement, use of study-stamped coupons, broad inclusion criteria, incentives, and study sites within walking distances all contributed to the successful implementation of the sampling methodology.    Conclusion  RDS is an important tool in reaching a diverse sample of underserved and at-risk young adults for study participation. Implications for optimizing RDS for behavioral studies in this population are discussed.  