Corticosteroid use and increased CXCR2 levels on leukocytes are associated with lumacaftor/ivacaftor discontinuation in cystic fibrosis patients homozygous for the F508del CFTR mutation
 Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common life-shortening genetic disease and is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Several current therapies aim at improving availability and/or function of the mutant CFTR proteins. The combination therapeutic lumacaftor/ivacaftor (Orkambi, luma/iva) partially corrects folding and potentiates CFTR function impaired by the F508del mutation. Despite the potential for clinical benefit, a substantial number of patients discontinue treatment due to intolerable adverse effects. The aim of the present study is to identify differences between individuals who continued treatment and those who discontinued due to adverse respiratory effects to potentially inform treatment decisions. Clinical data from the year prior to treatment initiation were analyzed from 82 patients homozygous for the F508del mutation treated at the Colorado Adult CF Program. Blood samples were collected from 30 of these subjects before initiation of treatment to examine expression of circulating leukocyte surface antigens and cytokines. Clinical and demographic characteristics were analyzed along with inflammatory markers to determine biomarkers of drug discontinuation. The use of oral prednisone and/or nasal budesonide in the year prior to luma/iva initiation was more prevalent in CF subjects who did not tolerate luma/iva (82% vs. 43%). Increased age, but not gender or initial lung function, was associated with higher probability of discontinuing treatment due to side effects overall. Worse lung function (lower ppFEV 1 , ppFEF 25-75 ≤ 60%) was associated with higher incidence of discontinuing treatment due to pulmonary adverse effects. In a nested cohort of patients, increased surface levels of CXCR2 on CD14+CD16- monocytes were associated with discontinuation. Overall, the patients who tolerated luma/iva were distinguishable from those who did not tolerate the drug based on clinical and cellular markers obtained prior to treatment initiation. 