Factors associated with condom use among HIV-positive women living in Atlanta, Georgia
  Objectives  Consistent condom use is essential to reducing heterosexual transmission of HIV. African Americans are disproportionately affected by HIV in the United States despite comprising a small percentage of the population. Our objectives were to evaluate factors associated with self-reported condom use in a cohort of predominantly African American women receiving HIV care in Atlanta, Georgia.    Methods  A cross-sectional study of reproductive knowledge, attitudes, and practices among adult, sexually-active, HIV-positive women attending the Grady Infectious Disease Clinic in Atlanta, Georgia was conducted from July, 2013 to November, 2014 to evaluate factors associated with self-reported condom use. Primary outcomes included: condom use at last vaginal intercourse and consistent condom use with vaginal intercourse over the last six months. Descriptive, bivariable, and multivariable logistic regression analyses were performed.    Results  Of 187 women enrolled, 170 reported having vaginal intercourse in the last six months. Seventy-four percent used condoms at last vaginal intercourse, whereas 53% reported consistent condom use over the last six months. In adjusted analyses, factors associated with condom use at last intercourse included decreased frequency of sex, no history of drug use, and confidence to discuss condom use with sexual partners (p<0.05). Factors associated with consistent condom use in the past six months were older age, being single/dating, and confidence to discuss condom use with sexual partners. History of drug use, having HIV-positive partners, and unprotected anal intercourse were associated with inconsistent use (p<0.05).    Conclusions  Improved strategies are needed to educate women on the importance of safe sexual practices and condom negotiation. Healthcare providers should strive to have an open dialogue with patients about condom use, whether they engage in anal sex, and its risks.  