Association of skeletal muscle and serum metabolites with maximum power output gains in response to continuous endurance or high-intensity interval training programs: The TIMES study – A randomized controlled trial
  Background  Recent studies have begun to identify the molecular determinants of inter-individual variability of cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) in response to exercise training programs. However, we still have an incomplete picture of the molecular mechanisms underlying trainability in response to exercise training.    Objective  We investigated baseline serum and skeletal muscle metabolomics profile and its associations with maximal power output (MPO) gains in response to 8-week of continuous endurance training (ET) and high-intensity interval training (HIIT) programs matched for total units of exercise performed (the TIMES study).    Methods  Eighty healthy sedentary young adult males were randomized to one of three groups and 70 were defined as completers (> 90% of sessions): ET (n = 30), HIIT (n = 30) and control (CO, n = 10). For the CO, participants were asked to not exercise for 8 weeks. Serum and skeletal muscle samples were analyzed by 1H-NMR spectroscopy. The targeted screens yielded 43 serum and 70 muscle reproducible metabolites (intraclass > 0.75; coefficient of variation < 25%). Associations of baseline metabolites with MPO trainability were explored within each training program via three analytical strategies: (1) correlations with gains in MPO; (2) differences between high and low responders to ET and HIIT; and (3) metabolites contributions to the most significant pathways related to gains in MPO. The significance level was set at P < 0.01 or false discovery rate of 0.1.    Results  The exercise programs generated similar gains in MPO (ET = 21.4 ± 8.0%; HIIT = 24.3 ± 8.5%). MPO associated baseline metabolites supported by all three levels of evidence were: serum glycerol, muscle alanine, proline, threonine, creatinine, AMP and pyruvate for ET, and serum lysine, phenylalanine, creatine, and muscle glycolate for HIIT. The most common pathways suggested by the metabolite profiles were aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis, and carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism.    Conclusion  We suggest that MPO gains in both programs are potentially associated with metabolites indicative of baseline amino acid and translation processes with additional evidence for carbohydrate metabolism in ET.  