A cross-sectional evaluation of five warfarin anticoagulation services in Uganda and South Africa
  Introduction  Warfarin is the most commonly prescribed oral anticoagulant in sub-Saharan Africa and requires ongoing monitoring. The burden of both infectious diseases and non-communicable diseases is high and medicines used to treat comorbidities may interact with warfarin. We describe service provision, patient characteristics, and anticoagulation control at selected anticoagulation clinics in Uganda and South Africa.    Methods  We evaluated two outpatient anticoagulation services in Kampala, Uganda and three in Cape Town, South Africa between 1 January and 31 July 2018. We collected information from key staff members about the clinics’ service provision and extracted demographic and clinical data from a sample of patients’ clinic records. We calculated time in therapeutic range (TTR) over the most recent 3-month period using the Rosendaal interpolation method.    Results  We included three tertiary level, one secondary level and one primary level anticoagulation service, seeing between 30 and 800 patients per month. Care was rendered by nurses, medical officers, and specialists. All healthcare facilities had on-site pharmacies; laboratory INR testing was off-site at two. Three clinics used warfarin dose-adjustment protocols; these were not validated for local use. We reviewed 229 patient clinical records. Most common indications for warfarin were venous thrombo-embolism in 112/229 (49%), atrial fibrillation in 74/229 (32%) and valvular heart disease in 30/229 (13%). Patients were generally followed up monthly. HIV prevalence was 20% and 5% at Ugandan and South African clinics respectively. Cardiovascular comorbidity predominated. Furosemide, paracetamol, enalapril, simvastatin, and tramadol were the most common concomitant drugs. Anticoagulation control was poor at all included clinics with median TTR of 41% (interquartile range 14% to 69%).    Conclusions  TTR was suboptimal at all included sites, despite frequent patient follow-up. Strategies to improve INR control in sub-Saharan patients taking warfarin are needed. Locally validated warfarin dosing algorithms in Uganda and South Africa may improve INR control.  