Genetic associations with radiological damage in rheumatoid arthritis: Meta-analysis of seven genome-wide association studies of 2,775 cases
  Background  Previous studies of radiological damage in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have used candidate-gene approaches, or evaluated single genome-wide association studies (GWAS). We undertook the first meta-analysis of GWAS of RA radiological damage to: (1) identify novel genetic loci for this trait; and (2) test previously validated variants.    Methods  Seven GWAS (2,775 RA cases, of a range of ancestries) were combined in a meta-analysis. Radiological damage was assessed using modified Larsen scores, Sharp van Der Heijde scores, and erosive status. Single nucleotide polymophsim (SNP) associations with radiological damage were tested at a single time-point using regression models. Primary analyses included age and disease duration as covariates. Secondary analyses also included rheumatoid factor (RF). Meta-analyses were undertaken in trans-ethnic and European-only cases.    Results  In the trans-ethnic primary meta-analysis, one SNP (rs112112734) in close proximity to HLA-DRB1 , and strong linkage disequilibrium with the shared-epitope, attained genome-wide significance ( P = 4.2x10 -8 ). In the secondary analysis (adjusting for RF) the association was less significant ( P = 1.7x10 -6 ). In both trans-ethnic primary and secondary meta-analyses 14 regions contained SNPs with associations reaching P <5x10 -6 ; in the European primary and secondary analyses 13 and 10 regions contained SNPs reaching P <5x10 -6 , respectively. Of the previously validated SNPs for radiological progression, only rs660895 (tagging HLA-DRB1*04 : 01 ) attained significance ( P = 1.6x10 -5 ) and had a consistent direction of effect across GWAS.    Conclusions  Our meta-analysis confirms the known association between the HLA-DRB1 shared epitope and RA radiological damage. The lack of replication of previously validated non-HLA markers highlights a requirement for further research to deliver clinically-useful prognostic genetic markers.  