Examining the relationship between blood lead level and stunting, wasting and underweight- A cross-sectional study of children under 2 years-of-age in a Bangladeshi slum
 Elevated blood lead level (BLL) is known to cause cardiac, immune, and cognitive damage but had not been thoroughly studied in relation to stunting among children under two years of age. We primarily aimed to assess the relationship between elevated BLL, the accumulation of concerned amount of the metal lead in blood and stunting and secondarily—wasting and underweight amongst Bangladeshi children less than two years of age. For this cross-sectional study, BLL measurements, anthropometric data, and socioeconomic indicator information were collected and analyzed for 729 children under two years of age upon enrollment in the MAL-ED study conducted in a Bangladeshi slum area. Univariate, bivariate and multivariate analyses were carried out to observe the proportion and mean and contribution of elevated BLL and other relevant variables in explaining the occurrence of stunting. Of the enrolled subjects, 39.0% were stunted [length-for-age z score (LAZ<-2)], 50.3% were male, and 86.6% had an elevated BLL (≥5μg/dL). Mean BLL of stunted children was 8.47 ± 3·37 μg/dL and 8.10 ± 3·80 μg/dL for non-stunted children. Proportion of children with elevated BLL was not significantly different between the stunted and non-stunted groups (p>0.05). When adjusted for other variables, elevated BLL was found to be a significant predictor of stunting and underweight (p<0.05) but not wasting (p>0.05). Elevated BLL (p<0·01), child’s gender and weight (p<0·001), maternal body mass index (BMI) (p<0.05) and severe household food insecurity (p<0·05) were all significantly associated with stunting in the multivariate model. Increased odds of stunting was also observed for increased BLL. The findings suggest that chronic lead poisoning is significantly associated with high level of stunting among child slum dwellers in Bangladesh. These findings strengthen the argument for improved lead reduction efforts in Bangladesh, where lead poisoning and stunting are both highly prevalent. 