An integrated nutrition and health program package on IYCN improves breastfeeding but not complementary feeding and nutritional status in rural northern India: A quasi-experimental randomized longitudinal study
  Background  Undernutrition below two years of age remains a major public health problem in India. We conducted an evaluation of an integrated nutrition and health program that aimed to improve nutritional status of young children by improving breast and complementary feeding practices over that offered by the Government of India’s standard nutrition and health care program.    Methods  In Uttar Pradesh state, through multi-stage cluster random sampling, 81 villages in an intervention district and 84 villages in a comparison district were selected. A cohort of 957 third trimester pregnant women identified during house-to-house surveys was enrolled and, following childbirth, mother-child dyads were followed every three months from birth to 18 months of age. The primary outcomes were improvements in weight-for-age and length-for-age z scores, with improved breastfeeding and complementary feeding practices as intermediate outcomes.    Findings  Optimal breastfeeding practices were higher among women in intervention than comparison areas, including initiating breastfeeding within one hour of delivery (17.4% vs. 2.7%, p<0.001), feeding colostrum (34.7% vs. 8.4%, p<0.001), avoiding pre-lacteals (19.6% vs. 2.1%, p<0.001) and exclusively breastfeeding up to 6 months (24.1% vs. 15.3%, p = 0.001). However, differences were few and mixed between study arms with respect to complementary feeding practices. The mean weight-for-age z-score was higher at 9 months (-2.1 vs. -2.4, p = 0.0026) and the prevalence of underweight status was lower at 12 months (58.5% vs. 69.3%, p = 0.047) among intervention children. The prevalence of stunting was similar between study arms at all ages. Coefficients to show the differences between the intervention and comparison districts (0.13 cm/mo) suggested significant faster linear growth among intervention district infants at earlier ages (0–5 months).    Interpretation  Mothers participating in the intervention district were more likely to follow optimal breast, although not complementary feeding practices. The program modestly improved linear growth in earlier age and weight gain in late infancy. Comprehensive nutrition and health interventions are complex; the implementation strategies need careful examination to improve feeding practices and thus impact growth.    Trial registration  The trial was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT00198835 .  